---
layout: default
title: A Few Thoughts on Feedback Models
tags: [drafts]
---
I believe that being able to give and receive feedback is one of the important
skills we have. Beyond the existing benefits of retroflection feedback has the
added benefit of shaping our relationships as well as our personal growth.

Because of this added social dynamic, feedback has a few more pitfalls and
benefits than introspection.

##Benefits
Introspection is limited by what we personally can think of. Our blind spots
remain invisible and solutions outside our experience remain beyond the
horizon. Feedback brings some light to the dark corners of our pysche.

## Pitfalls
Feedback can also have many pitfalls, both as a giver and a receiver. I believe
the most common pitfall is a disparity in receptiveness of the receiver, and
delivery of the sharer. Receptiveness seems to be hinged on three main points:

 * Timing
 * Directness
 * Audience

### Timing
Timing, it seems, is everything. While as a giver it is often easiest to deliver
feedback in the moment this is often the time when the receiver is least capable
of hearing it. Instead of delivering feedback immediately, pause until the
hearer is ready for it. This could be a few moments if you are collaborating on
something together, or a few days or weeks if you only spend time together
periodically.

There are some instances when immediate feedback is necessary; say a hostile
work environment or harassing behavior. In these instances the intent is to
immediately stop inappropriate behavior; not to correct it.

### Directness
Directness is about clarity. Some people require the Socratic method, while
others prefer the naked truth. If the primary goal of feedback is to help
someone choose how to alter their behavior, providing feedback in a way that
someone can both hear and comprehend.

Some people cannot hear tact, while others require it to keep them level enough
to comprehend the feedback that was delivered. Understanding who is delivering
the feedback can make it easier to hear; for instance when someone who prefers
direct feedback gives direct feedback they rarely intend to slight and one who
lacks subtlety can realize an offhand comment had deeper meaning because of who
delivered it.

### Audience
Where you deliver feedback and who else hears it can contribute significantly to
receptiveness.
private for most, public when behavior reqquires immediate addressing. sime
people are more receptive to public feedback than others. in fact some may
prefer. this is not common.
