---
layout: article
tags: [project-management, business, leadership]
---

The iron triangle has been redefined several times in the past few years.

There's [Jurgen Appelo's Iron
Square](http://www.noop.nl/2008/04/getting-square.html), [Jim Highsmith's Agile
Triangle](http://jimhighsmith.com/beyond-scope-schedule-and-cost-the-agile-triangle/),
[Max Pool's Iron
Line](http://codesqueeze.com/the-broken-iron-triangle-is-broken/), and any
number of other variations. At first glance, these seem like good models which
allow us to balance needs.


### But There Is a Flaw.

The traditional Iron Triangle concerns itself with things which are
quantitative: cost, time to deliver, number of features, etc; while most of the
agile permutations have moved to qualitative measurements like value and
quality. All of a sudden we are mixing something objective, like time, with
something subjective, like value.

### So... How Does This Break Things?

By comparing objective and subjective attributes we no longer have the iron
nature of the iron triangle. An example: it is possible to increase the amount
of value created by doing the most valuable work first. This increases value
created while potentially decreasing the amount of time it takes to produce that
value! We've "bent iron" so to speak.

We may also introduce practices which decrease time to complete while increasing
costs; such as bringing in a domain expert to pair or mob program with us or
using test driven design to improve the changeability of our software.

In software and other creative work, adding cost normally means adding people,
however Brooks's Law states as we add people to a late project, time to complete
increases. This is an instance where the traditional Iron Triangle appears
flawed.

So what should we do when trying to apply a triangle to agile practices:

### Use Triangles (Iron or Otherwise) as Mental Models.

Triangles help us observe, not control. Find their limits; such as where, when,
and why they break down. Challenge assumptions they make and learn what systems
they were initially conceived to explain.

Remember: There are no best practices. Only practices with varying degrees of
effectiveness depending on the environment in which they are applied.
