---
layout: default
title: The Ants Go Marching
category: articles
tags: [drafts]
---

Once upon a time there was an ant colony. It wasn't a very big colony, but it
had the best hunters, builders, and nurses for miles around. For many seasons,
the colony prospered.

The builders dug out barracks for the hunters, nurseries for the nurses, and
dormitories for themselves. They dug stores for the food, which were soon
overflowing with the hunters spoils. The nurses raised strong children who
swelled the ranks of the colony, making it stronger than ever.

One day, the weather turned cooler. The hunters couldn't find as much food as
before. Soon the food they brought back was not enough to feed the colony, so
the Queen opened up the food reserves. 

As winter grew longer the ants became afraid they would run out of food before
spring. The leaders of the castes, believing their own caste to be most
important, began to dissent.

"My Queen! We are the builders. We built this strong home! You must give us more
food or we will all starve, and then who will prevent the tunnels from
collapsing upon us and killing us all?"

"Don't listen to them!" snapped the leader of the hunters. "We are the ones who
found and brought the food! We deserve more food, or who will find food
when spring comes?"

"Oh dear!" moaned the leader of the nurses. "Our poor children! How will we
protect them and teach them to be strong? Our entire colony will die out if we
lose our children We must have a larger share of the food!"

The Queen was silent. She could see a seed of hate being planted in the hearts
of the formerly close brothers. Seeking to be fair and show her respect for
their leadership, she decreed:

"Every caste will be given food, according to the amount of ants in it. It is up
to you, the caste leaders, to choose who to feed to make it through the winter."

The leaders were angry. "You are weak!" declared the hunter. "You are not strong
enough to lead us!"

"You are unstable!" gasped the builder, "You lack the foundations to support us!"

"You are foolish!" said the nurse, "You are not wise enough to rule us!"

But the Queen refused to relent.

Secretly, the leaders began to plot. Each believed their caste was strong enough
to survive on it's own, and so they decided that come spring time, they would
found their own colonies.

After a harsh winter, they set their plans in motion. Each leader left the
colony; taking the best of their caste with them and leaving the young, infirm,
and elderly.

The Queen was sad to see her formerly great colony torn apart, but resolved to
make the best of it. She gathered all who remained together into the great hall.

"My people," she began, "we have faced a harsh winter. We have been betrayed by
those we entrusted, and we have difficult days ahead of us. From now on, in
order to build respect between our castes, we will live together in towns of
mixed skills. Builders with nurses, nurses with hunters, and hunters with
builders. All food gathered by a town shall be theirs and their leaders shall
decide how to split it when the winter comes again."

Murmurs ran through the crowd "But those dirty hunters are who got us into this
mess in the first place!" shouted an elderly builder. "I don't want to share my
food with them!"

"Then you can find your own food on the surface and live on your own. But you
will no longer be given food from our hunters or care from our nurses." The old
builder was silent.

"Fine." He grouched. "I'll share my room. For now."

As the summer went on, the Queens colony grew stronger. Though much of the
wisdom of the experts had been lost, they were able to collect food, keep their
tunnels from collapsing, and rear their young. Slowly, the different castes grew
to respect each other, and enjoy living with one another.

As the summer slowly changed to fall three weak, strange ants came to the
colony to beg audience with the Queen.

"Please," the first begged, "I come from the colony of builders. We are in need
of aid. We built the most beautiful colony, with deep and strong tunnels, but we
were unable to find enough food to feed our children, and many of our strongest
builders are now unable to walk. Please, give us food so that we may survive!"

"No!" the second interjected, "I am from the colony of hunters. We found much
food, and stored it for the winter; but the tunnels to our storehouses have
collapsed and we are starving. Give us the food instead!"

"But Queen!" the third cried, "I am from the colony of nurses. We have many
strong young children to feed, but we have been unable to store enough food for
winter because we cannot build storehouses to put them! We must have the extra
food so our children can live on!"

The three began to quarrel amongst themselves again, pleading their cases and
shouting down their former brothers. The Queen was infuriated by their
pettiness, but moved by their plights.

"Silence!" she declared "You nurses have many strong young ants, go to the
hunters and dig out their stores. Go to the builders and seek their wisdom to
guide you in reinforcing the hunters tunnels and building your own store rooms.
Hunters, give part of your food to the nurses for digging your tunnels and part
to the builders for their help in reinforcing them."

The three ants were shocked by this suggestion. "Give up our food?!" the hunter
replied. "Never!" 

"Help those selfish hunters?" shouted the builder. "I'd rather die!"

"Our children are strong," declared the nurse. "We will make do without their help."

And so they left. After another harsh winter, the queen sent scouts to find the
colonies of her former friends. At the hunters colony, all was in ruins;
abandoned, but with inaccessible storehouses full of food. The builders colony
had become a beautiful tomb, filled with the dead. The nurses had survived, but
barely. All of the elders had been lost, and they were quibbling amongst
themselves.

The Queen, not being one to pass up an opportunity, dug out the store houses of
the hunters; offered sanctuary to the remaining nurses if they would live by her
rules; and formed a second colony in the builders majestic ruins.

**Respect those who are different, or starve in the winter.**
