---
title: The Learn Startup
layout: article
tags: [parables, business, programming, career]
---
A long time ago, in an industry far far away, there were two competing
production models: the assembly line and the master craftsmen.

The master craftsmen hand built each and every machine. Painstakingly ensuring
it was beautiful and functional. Each machine was resplendent and tuned to
perfection, but it took days to build one.

<!--more-->

The assembly line churned hundreds of machines for each one the craftsmen
produced. The machines worked and were not too shabby. Sure they were less
reliable, less beautiful, and less powerful, but they were also much less
expensive.

Soon, the assembly line became the dominant form of manufacture. Producers began
to tweak their lines. Some increased the speed. Others added quality control at
the end. Still more built machines to do most of the work, seeking consistency
and precision.

Eventually, the experiments yielded smaller and smaller results, to the point
where running an experiment was often more expensive than the changes it
yielded. The companies began to get complacent.

At this time, a young producer decided that instead of waiting to check for
quality at the end of the manufacture; they would prevent the part from
continuing along the assembly line if its quality was lacking.

Their colleagues were skeptical. "This will never work!" They said. "You're
stopping work left and right!" The young producer begged for an opportunity to
try their experiment. "Let's try just for one small factory! We'll follow the
same rigorous validation process! If it's a failure we can retool the factory
to do it the normal way!"

The producers colleagues agreed. A small factory was outfitted to allow anyone
to stop the parts from moving through the line. For the first few weeks, it was
slow going, with stops every hour.

However, when the line stopped the producer demanded that the factory workers
discover why and fix it. Slowly, but surely, stoppages slowed down. Machines
were rolling off the line nearly as quickly as the other factories. Even
better, very few needed further work after going through quality checks.

After a few months, the factory was outperforming every other factory in it's
class. They were building more machines that worked better at a lower cost per
unit than any other factory in its class!

The rest, as they say, is history.

_The preceding text is a highly simplified explanation of the rise of Toyota
and the lean production system which is now buzzwording into meaninglessness in
the technology industry. Stop doing lean startups. Start doing learn startups._
